Hello everyone. This is another video in
the design interview preparation series
from code. So in this video let's talk
about how do we design a chat
application something like a WhatsApp or
a Facebook messenger or any other
messenger of that sort. Now let's look
at some functional and non-functional
requirement that this platform needs to
support. Okay. So we will support a
onetoone chat wherein a person can send
a message to another person or a user.
uh there would be something called a
group chat where there could somebody
could make a group of people and
whenever anybody in the group sends a
message to the group that message is
received by everybody in the group.
Okay. Then the messages could contain
text it could contain images. It could
contain videos and then it could extend
to other kind of documents as well.
There is something called read received
which is basically the single tick when
you when the message is sent, double
tick when the message is delivered to
the user and a blue tick when the person
sees the message. Okay. And then we'll
also show last scene time of a
particular user.
Coming to the non-functional
requirements, this platform needs to
have a very very low latency because for
a chat application, it needs to look
very realtime. So while you are sending
a message the other person should
immediately be able to see that message
and obviously it should have a very high
availability. This system should not go
down no matter what happens. Also there
should not be uh any lag. So in other
videos that we have talked about in the
past we were able to live with a lot of
lag as well. But in this video we cannot
have a lag because again it needs to be
a very realtime system wherein I'm
typing something to you and you can see
it then and there and then respond to
it. Right. Coming to some scale numbers,
these are approximate numbers of
WhatsApp. Again, I do not know if these
are actually correct or not, but I just
read it somewhere. So, WhatsApp has
roughly 2 billion users out of which 1.6
billion users access it on a monthly
basis. These are unique users. Each day,
WhatsApp has somewhere close to 65
billion messages being sent across all
the users. And that's a very big number.
So we'll try to look at how can we
design a system that can deliver all of
these functional requirements with a
very low latency and can live with these
kind of numbers. Now numbers for
Facebook Messenger are approximately
similar and other chat application could
also be running at a very same scale.
Let's look at the overall architecture
of the whole system. We'll first start
with the chatting solution and then
we'll look at other small pieces that
surround it. Okay. Now let's start with
the user flow. All of these things that
you see here are basically user devices.
Could be mobile phones, could be web
browsers, could be variable devices like
smartwatch and all of that. And let's
say user one wants to send a message to
user two. Okay. So the flow goes like
this. User one wants to send a message
to user two with a message ID M1.
Okay. Now what happens is user one is
talking to something called a websocket
handler one. Uh now there'll be a lot of
these websocket handlers. What this is
is basically a websocket handler is a
server on our back end which is keeping
open connections with all the active
users. Right now these are the live
users who are having a active internet
connection kind of a thing. Okay. Now
all of these user are connected to some
of the machines then there be a lot of
these machines and all of these would be
distributed across the globe so that
people in certain geography talk to the
server which are nearer to them so as to
have a lesser latency. Now let's just
say user one is connecting connected to
this websocket handler one and it sends
this message to websocket handler one
saying send this message M1 to user U2.
Okay. Now this web soocket handler does
two three things when this happens. it
talks to something called uh websocket
manager. Okay, websocket manager is a
repository of uh the fact that which
device is connected to what all users.
Now because these are probably thousands
of devices, we need to give that
information at some central place which
is this websocket manager service. It
sits on top of a radisk which stores two
information mainly. First of all, it s
shows that user one is connected to
websocket handler one and websocket
handler one is connected to user one,
user 10, user 20 something of that sort.
So a list of user ID that a particular
machine is connected to that information
gets stored in that disk. Now let's say
a connection break between a user and a
machine and now the user is connected to
a different machine. So that information
is updated into this uh websocket
manager through this websocket manager
into this.
Now the second thing that websocket
handler one does is talk to something
called message service. Now message
service is basically the repository of
all the messages in the system. It will
have API to get a message by message ID,
get the message by user ids and various
filters. So if you want to fetch all the
unread messages by a particular user and
all of that that would be powered by
this message service and it sits on top
of a Cassandra database. Okay. Why
Cassandra? Because again we have these
billions of users who will send many
many billions of messages. So Cassandra
is a fairly good data store to store
that kind of a volume. Plus the query
pattern that we have fairly aligns with
the query pattern that Cassandra is good
at. So that's the reason we choose a
Cassandra here. Now there are two kinds
of messages message services that we can
build. Basically there are two kind of
messaging platforms that we have. One is
something like a Facebook which stores
all of your messages. So in that case
everything would be stored in a katanda
permanently and then there's something
like a WhatsApp which stores the
messages only till the time it is not
delivered to the users and once it gets
a delivery acknowledgement then it
deletes the message. So if we want to
build a WhatsApp kind of a system we
could delete the message from here also.
Now deletes are a bit inefficient in
Cassandra. So if you were to build a
build that kind of a system we might
choose some other data store as well but
for now Cassandra would work very fine.
Okay. So coming back to we were at
websocket handler one which got this
message saying U1 wants to send to U2 a
message M1. It talked to both of these
services and it can it would happen
parallelly. So it can happen in any
order. Okay. So message service would
save the message into Cassandra and give
the message ID. Okay. And uh let's say
message ID is M1. And web soocket
manager will now tell websocket handler
one saying user U2 is connected to this
websocket handler 2. Okay. Now do
whatever you want to do. Now this guy
websocket handler one will talk to
websocket handler 2 saying that I've got
a message for you too. I believe that
guy is connected to you. Go send him
that message.
Okay. Uh now there are two three
possibilities.
Websocket handler 2 could actually be
connected to that user still and he will
send the message right or it could not
be connected. It will say that I'm not
connected to the user. The person has
probably gone offline. So he'll not do
anything and the flow ends there. Now
let's say the web soocket handler 2
sends this message to YouTube.
Now there are two three things that can
happen. The user can maybe the user is
not using the app actively but the
message got delivered. So this device
will send a message to websocket handler
2 saying that I've received the message
or the second option could be the person
actually open on the chat chat of this
user U1 and could see the message then
and there. Right? So the device would
send a message saying I have seen the I
have received and seen the message M1.
Now this guy websocket handler 2 again
query websocket manager saying that this
message was now either delivered or
read. I need to inform user one. So tell
me which machine is talking to user U1.
It'll get this particular machine's IP
saying this guy is now handling user U1.
And it'll send this message to websocket
handler one saying this particular
message ID M1 has now been read or
received whatever and go inform the user
and this will be informed to the user.
Now how are these connections happening?
So these are websocket connections which
is basically a birectional connection.
So there's no client and server heads
any party can send a message. So that's
how even server is able to send a
message to the client. Okay. And these
are built on top of TCP.
Now in this whole process we queried
websocket manager a lot of times right?
User one calling for U2 U2 calling for
U1 and all of that. Now at the same time
if the user sends multiple messages
again we'll try to do that right. So
let's try to cache this information
somewhere. So each machine will cache
two kinds of things. One it will cach is
the list of users that are connected to
itself. So if user U2 was also connected
to the same machine, it would have the
data in memory. it would never have to
call this manager. Okay. The other thing
is uh it would temporarily for a very
short duration of a time maybe 10 20 30
seconds cache the information about
conversations that it has had recently.
So if user U2 was connected to this
handler H2 this guy will keep it in
cache saying user U2 is on this
particular machine because if one sends
another message to this U2 it now need
not call this web soocket manager. But
keep in mind this second cache needs to
be stored with a very low time to live
and it should expire every 30 odd
seconds because remember these are
global users. So let's say if somebody
is connecting from Sri Lanka, you would
probably get connected to a server in
India. Right now that's a fairly large
amount of distance and that comm and
that communication might break in
between and the person might get
connected to a different machine the
next time. So to kind of handle those
things easily, we keep this cache at a
very low TPL. Okay.
Now there are another set of things it
now the receipts that we have sent to
user U1 and user U2 all those receipts
we need to decide whether we want to
store them or not all right so if let's
say we want to store the read receipts
also we can store that as a probably
status in Cassandra in the same table
saying this particular message has a to
start with status as sent then it'll
move to received then it'll move to red
right now we can decide you can decide
that based on your on your conversation
with the interviewer whether you want to
store this information or even whether
you want to store the messages in the
first place or not. So all of those
things are a conversation that you need
to have with your interviewer but you
still need to store it for at least some
time. So let's just say that user one
sent a message to user U2 and then went
offline. Now the received wouldn't go
back right. So at least for a short
duration of time those read receives
need to be stored in the database and
whenever user one comes online then
you'll get that. Right? Now let's just
say user one wanted to send a message to
user three. Right? So uh second message
user one is sending a message to user C
which is some message M2 with some text.
Right? Now what will happen is uh again
it'll store in through message service.
It will call websocket manager to get
who is the machine which is handling
user U3. Now user U3 is offline. Okay.
There is no machine that is talking to
user U3. So now websocket manager will
return a response saying I don't have a
machine. Right now the flow ends there.
User this websocket handler one does not
inform anybody because there is no
machine talking to user U3. So the flow
breaks there. Now when user U3 comes
online. Now let's just say that user U3
gets connected to this websocket handler
3. What this webocket handler do in the
very first place is to query message
service and ask for are there any
messages for user U3 that are not in
received or read status. Okay. This
message service will respond back and
user UC will see all those messages.
Right? Then when as those messages are
being received and read those
communications will flow back through
the same flow like we discussed earlier.
So then these machines will start
talking to each other for user UC as
well and those receipts will go on to
other users as well. Good. Now there is
a potential race condition here. when
user one was sending a message for user
U3. Assume at the exact same time user 3
came online. Okay. Now we said these are
parallel calls wherein a person is
figuring out the machine who is being
used for U3 and storing the message. Now
let's just say that it the very first
thing that happened was webocket manager
returned that there is no machine that
is talking to user U3. The next thing
that happens was user U3 comes online
and queries message service saying that
get me all the messages. The third thing
that happens is it stores into websocket
manager that this machine 3 is handling
user U3. Right? And the fourth thing
that happens is this message gets stored
into this message service. Now websocket
handler 3 thinks that it has fetched all
the messages for user U3 and displayed
it on the device.
This websocket handler one thinks that
user 3 is offline and I have stored the
message and done my work but
fundamentally whatever this message M2
was that has not received this guy right
because before that message was was
stored this webocket handler three
retrieved all the messages right so
these kind of race conditions could
happen when you are doing parallel pulse
but there are multiple ways to handle it
you can either do it uh sequentially but
that will increase the latency so I not
recommend that what another solution you
could possibly we do is this websocket
handler keeps pulling the server once in
a while saying are there any messages
that I still missed right so for so all
of those messages could be pulled but
that would happen at a fairly low
frequency and that those could be bulk
calls something like are there any
messages for user U1 U2 U3 to U which
are in sent status right for all the
active users that this machine is
connected to and if it finds any
messages it will send all of those
messages as
Now there are certain things that happen
on the device itself. So let's say user
one was offline and you can still send
message onto some user chat right while
you are offline. So let's say you want
send another message to somebody while
it was offline. So what would happen is
so it will try to connect because
internet is not there. It will not be
able to connect to any server in that
scenario. What will happen even in all
other scenarios also all the messages
would be stored in a local database
which is persisted onto the device disk
like let's say it's a Android
application it could use a any kind of a
Android database like SQLite or anything
and store all those messages on the disk
now whenever the device comes gets the
internet connection it'll pull those
messages from a Q kind of a thing or the
database and sends those messages right
so this is how it would be able to
handle scenarios where the device was
offline Okay, cool. Now we have the next
thing as group messages. So how does
that work? So group messages almost work
in a very similar way. So let's say
another scenario you wanted to send a
message to group G1 a message called M3.
Right now what would happen is in case
of groups the behavior is slightly
different. So this web soocket handler
wouldn't take care of panning out to all
the groups. This is a very lightweight
service. This which just takes a message
from a user and sends it to somebody and
or gets a message from somebody and
sends it to a user. It doesn't have a
lot of logic. Okay. For group messages,
what it'll do is it'll just send a
message to message service saying user
U1 wants to send a message MC to group
G1. Uh store it and do whatever you need
to do. So this message service will
insert that into Cassandra saying the
message is stored. Along with that,
it'll also do for all the group
messages. It'll put all of those
messages into a Kafka topic saying
there's a group message that I've got
which is this user U1 sending to group
G1 a message M3 go send it out. Okay.
From Kafka there will be something
called a group message handler. This is
basically a Kafka consumer which is
listening onto the same topic and it is
responsible for sending out all the
group messages. Okay. First of all, it
does some validations that it needs to
assuming that's out of scope for us
saying whether a U1 is even in the group
to be able to send it to G1. But
assuming that's not a part of scope, it
basically queries group service to get
all the users that are into group G1.
Okay, it gets a list of users. Then
it'll remove the user U1 from that list
and now it has a list of the users that
are supposed to get this message. Right?
Now it follows the exact same flow that
was used for one to one messages but for
all of these users. So it basically
calls websocket manager saying give me
all the machines that these users are
connected with. Okay, it'll get a
response machine one is connected to
user U3, U4, U5, machine 2 is connected
to some other set of users and all of
that. Then it'll send the messages to
individual machines saying to this user
send this message to this user send this
message. Right? And then the receipts
and all will follow the exact same that
was handled earlier. Right?
Now the next thing what happens when
people are uploading assets like images
or videos or anything of that sort. So
the very first thing that happens when
you are trying to upload any any content
is that there is some kind of a
compression that happens. Now in real
WhatsApp there's a encryption also that
happens right at device and the
encrypted messages are sent out and when
the messages are received even the
encrypted messages are received and
they're decrypted but we'll keep that
out of scope we'll just think of some
compression there okay so this let's say
U3 is sending a image to U2 right so
what will happen is U3 is sending to U2
some image right now this is basically
two a two-step process. The first step
is upload an image to a server and get
an image ID and then send that image ID
via the regular route to user YouTube
and then YouTube can fetch the image.
Right? So how the image upload works is
again these are lightweight servers.
They wouldn't have any logic. Okay. So
very first thing is compression on of
the image over here or video or
anything. Then it'll talk to something
called this asset service. Okay. So this
U3 is talking to asset service through
this load balancer. Okay. Again all the
authentication authorization will happen
at this layer and asset service now gets
the whole image or video or whatever.
Right? Asset service will use S3 as a
data store and it'll store all the
images there. Right now based on which
image is getting what kind of hits on
S3, it might decide to move some of the
images on CDN and it could also decide
to move replicate into multiple CDNs or
some CDNs from where it is getting
traffic. Okay. But assuming it has
uploaded the image on S3 and it sends a
response saying now let's say it is a
image I1 right now it will come as a
regular message to YouTube through this
websocket handler and webock these two
websocket handlers saying now send this
message and the receipts will happen in
the same way that we talked about
earlier.
Now there could be one optimization that
happens. Let's say there's a political
event or a sports event and a lot of
people are sharing the same image for
some reason, right? Do we need to upload
the same image multiple times if five
people are uploading the same image?
Probably not. So before it even uploads
to asset service, the first thing that
the device will do is take a hash of
those images and send the hash content
to asset service. Right? Basically,
it'll it's a way of asking do you have
this image already or not? If you have
it then just send it to user YouTube. If
you don't have it then ask me and I'll
upload it something of that sort. And of
course when it's about hashing there
would be various problems like duplicate
hash outputs and collisions and all of
that. So instead of taking one hash we
could probably take five different hash
algorithms and use all of them to get
five different hashes. And if all the
five hashes are matching against an
image then we'll say that an image is
already there. If it's not matching then
we'll say that the image needs to be
uploaded and it'll follow the regular
route that we talked about and if it is
already there then anyway it's there it
just sends a message. Now let's look at
remaining few components and and how
they help in the whole system. So this
is the user app which talk to all of
these components. It could be a browser
as well. Now the very first thing is
something called user service. This is
basically a service which owns the user
profile information. uh it could be like
name, their user ID, their profile
picture in case of WhatsApp and some
user preferences in case of Facebook it
will be a larger set of data but all of
that whatever that data is would be
residing in a clustered MySQL for which
runs the user database okay now all of
those information would also be cached
in status cluster very similar to the
way we have implemented in other uh
similar solutions against a key we'll be
having the user profile information and
a lot of other information as well okay
now There's something called a group
service which basically maintains all
the group information. It basically has
information of which group has what all
users. Think of it as a many to many
table with a user ID and a group ID and
a time when user was acted and added
into the group and maybe a status saying
whether the user is admin or something
of that sort. Again this information
would be stored in the MySQL cluster uh
which would be geographically
distributed and it'll have multiple
slaves through which the read queries
will be run. Now it'll also have a
radius sitting on top of it. So all the
APIs like let's say get users in a group
and something of that sort would be
powered by this radius cluster uh and
those APIs would be sitting within the
group service. Now each time either user
service or group service queries radius
and it does not find the data is when
they actually query one of the slaves of
these databases fetch the information
put it into radius and respond back to
the whoever is calling them. Okay. And
then group service was used in the group
messaging workflow that we looked at
earlier. Now each action that a user is
taking on their app gives us a lot of
information right. So for example, if a
person is visiting some user's profile a
lot of times that tells us that the
person is interested in this user right
it could be used for some kind of
analytics or let's say if a particular
person is talking a lot about sports
that does tell us that the person is a
sports enthusiast. Now how could we do
that? So all events that are happening
either there are events within the app
or there are messages or anything of
that sort would be sent either to this
analytic service and then to Kafka or
directly to Kafka in case of messages.
Right? Now there could be a spark
streaming consumer running on top of
this which could do a lot of inferences.
Right? First of all, it could do some
message classification into some tags
like a message is a sports kind of a
message or a general message or a
politics kind of a message and then try
to classify user bases that. So that is
one kind of analytics. Another thing
could be just simply some information
about what are people talking about in
general. Now this is not possible if the
messages are end to end encrypted. But
if that's not the case then we should be
easily able to infer all of that. Now
there are two parts. One is uh doing
some logic based on some streaming
content that could be done by a simple
spark streaming consumer and that
consumer would also put that data into
Hadoop right and then you can run a lot
of analytics query based on adoop
something like which are the people who
talks about sports a lot or which are
the people who just talk about a
particular kind of political party or
anything of that sort those kind of
analytics could be run out of that Haru
cluster.
Now these events are also having one
more usage. So each time a person does
an activity on the app those events are
listened by something called last scene
service. Okay. Now this last scene
service is basically the service used to
store the last scene time of a user.
Okay. Now the service I have made it to
sit on top of a Cassandra database which
has a column called user ID and a column
called last scene time. This could also
alternatively sit on top of a radius if
you have finite amount of data. But
along with last scene time if you want
to store certain other information then
reddis might have memory issues. So in
that scenario you can use a Cassandra.
You might have a doubt that when we use
MySQL for a user information why don't
we use a MySQL here. The reason is let's
say a user is on the app every 5 seconds
the app will send a notification that
the user is late right. So every 5
seconds for each user this will have a
insert into the database. What that
means is this is having an extremely
high throughput and now MySQL might not
be able to support that because these
are all the rights which will go into
the master node of my SQL. But if it's a
Cassandra, it could be spread out easily
across a lot of users. Now, Reddis might
also have those update problem because
for all the users you're doing a lot of
inserts. So, Reddius might not be able
to scale. But if it's a Cassandra, it
should easily be able to scale to any
amount of traffic, any amount of users
and those pings coming at any frequency.
Right? One more thing. So, there are two
kinds of events that are spawned. One
are the events that are spawned by the
app and one are the events that are
spawned by the users. So example of
events spawned by app could be as soon
as you turn the internet on the app
would make a websocket connection and
pull in some request. Now that is not a
user activity. So that would not be
captured as a you know activity of a
user in the last scene service. But as
soon as the person opens the app or
closes the app or does anything within
the context of an app those are actually
the events that last scene service would
be looking at. In general, all the
services that we looked at, we are
looking at here in in the other previous
section, all of those are as usual
horizontally scalable. So when your
number of users or anything increases,
you just add more number of nodes and
that should be able to handle itself.
Other than that, you'll obviously need
to do a lot of monitoring alerting
basically to ensure that you are able to
get to your NFRs of no lag, low latency,
and high availability. So some of the
important things that you want to kind
of keep a track of from a monitoring
perspective is the CPU memory
utilization of your services, your disk
utilization in the databases, um your
throughputs and latency onto your web
services and the disk utilization in
your Kafka and more importantly the lag
in Kafka. So let's say if your lag
increases you need to add more number of
consumers. So all of those metrics you
can capture store it into a graphana
kind of a store and plot some graphs out
of it and also you can build some
alerting out of it in case your numbers
go beyond a certain threshold you can
send out alerts. So those alerts could
be used to make some decisions. So for
example if your throughput is increasing
significantly you could add more
machines into a particular service and
in fact those things could be automated
as well. So you might if you're using a
AWS kind of a thing you might write a
script which looks at your throughput
and in adds more nodes or removes
certain nodes. So all of those things
are very important when it comes to a
chat application because one of your
very critical NFR is uh that it needs to
be actually real time. If it's not real
time then it'll give a very bad
experience and then people will kind of
drop out of your platform. So yeah that
should be it about that application.
Thanks for watching this video. If you
have any suggestions on what videos we
should make next or how we could improve
this one, do let us know by commenting
here. And don't forget to subscribe to
this channel, like the videos, and share
the videos with your friends while we
keep working to get more such content to
you. Happy learning.